Light Roast
Light roasting produces beans that are light brown and have a more sour taste.

Medium Roast
Medium roast coffees have medium brown beans. The beans do not have an oily surface in this roast. The coffee beans can have a bright acidity, but specific varietal aromatics (e.g. floral, fruity, vegetable, berry, etc.) of the coffee are still apparent.

Dark Roast
The beans in this roast have some oil on the surface and the color is rich and darker. The characteristics of the coffee are complemented by caramelization notes such as nutty, bread or baked goods, or chocolate, and the acidity has faded somewhat, bringing out a slightly bittersweet aftertaste. French roast is a good example.

Darker Roasts
The darkest roasts have shiny black beans with an oily surface. In a good/well done dark roast, there is still some good acidity to liven the cup. Dark roasts run the gamut from slightly dark to extremely charred. Italian roast and French roast are darker roasts.

----------------------

STANDARD ROAST LEVELS

Light Roast - light brown in color, generally preferred for milder coffee varieties.  The surface of the bean is dry with no oils present.  Light roasts in order of increasing level of roast include:

*  Light City Roast

*  Half City Roast

*  Cinnamon Roast

Medium Roast - medium brown in color with a stronger flavor and a non-oily surface of the bean.  The bean is typically slightly sweeter than a light roast.  This roast is sometimes referred to as American roast, because it is generally preferred in the U.S..  Medium roasts in order of increasing level of roast include:

*  American Roast

*  City Roast

*  City Roast Plus

Medium-Dark Roast - a rich, dark color with some oil on the surface of the bean.  A medium-dark roasted bean has a slightly bittersweet aftertaste.  Medium-Dark roasts in order of increasing level of roast include:

*  Breakfast Roast

*  Full City Roast

*  Full City Roast Plus

*  High Roast

*  Vienna Roast or Viennese Roast

Dark Roast - exhibited by shiny black beans with an oily surface.  This roast produces a significant amount of bitterness.  Darker roasted beans have lower levels of acidity.  Many roasters name their dark roasts differently, and the beans can be anywhere from black to charred.  Dark roasts in order of increasing level of roast include:

*  Continental Roast

*  New Orleans Roast

*  French Roast

*  Dark French Roast

*  Espresso Roast

*  European Roast

*  Italian Roast

*  Spanish Roast


--------------------------------------

Coffee Taste & Aroma

Similar to wine, coffee has some specific tastes and aromas that are present.  Judging these characteristics can be both objective and subjective.  There are certain tastes and aromas that good coffee cuppers look for; but the bottom line is how the coffee tastes to you and what type of coffee do you typically like.  Here are some guidelines in helping choose your coffee:

*  Aroma - how does the coffee smell, after grinding and after brewing.  This provides an indication of how your coffee will taste.  Typical aroma characteristics can include fruitiness, floral and herbal aromas.

*  Acidity - this just means the level of tanginess or liveliness available from a small to a large amount for a particular coffee.  Many people like a certain level of acidity in their coffee.  In general, different coffee growing regions have different acidity levels because of the soil and climate.

*  Body - how the coffee feels in your mouth.  This is the thickness or heaviness of the coffee on your tongue.  The range of body in a coffee can range from light (delicate body), to medium (balanced body), to heavy (full body).

*  Roast - the level of roasting, ranging from a light roast to a very dark roast.  There are many degrees of roasting between light and dark.  Many of the names are similar, but rather non-standardized within the industry.  For more information please review our "Roast Levels" information area.

*  Balance - the overall level of combination of the above factors.  Typically ranging from low to high, a coffee with a medium or "good" balance would exhibit fairly equal levels of acidity, body and aroma.  No single characteristic would overpower another.

These characteristics combine to provide the overall flavor characteristics of your selected coffee.

Like fine wines, coffee tastes typically evolve for an individual over time.  The more different types of coffee you try, help you determine what characteristics you like or dislike.  Over time, you will develop a preference for what types of coffees you choose.


Colombian
The coffee could have slight to moderate floral aromatics and could have barely perceptible to slight fruity character. It could have barely perceptible to slight-moderate green/sharp notes and earthy base notes.

Kona
The coffee could have slight to moderate floral aromatics and could have barely perceptible to slight fruity character. It could have barely perceptible to slight-moderate green/sharp notes and earthy base notes. A high quality Kona should further have a winey, spicy character distinctive to the varietal.

Kenyan
Desirable top-notes for a Kenyan coffee may encompass a variety of characteristics and may include fruity (specifically various types of berry or citrus aromatics), green/sharp notes, earthy base notes, and a slight to moderate body, which provides the feeling of fullness in the mouth. A high-quality Kenyan coffee may also possess a fairly high positive acidity or "brightness," without being so acidic as to produce a jarring or unbalanced character. High-quality Kenyans are also associated with clear, distinct flavors.

Sumatran
Desirable top-notes for a Sumatran coffee may encompass a variety of characteristics and may include fruity, vegetable (e.g. cucumbers, fresh peas), green/sharp notes, and earthy base notes. The coffee may also possess aromatics particularly associated with the varietal, such as aromatic woods (e.g. cedar or pine). A high-quality Sumatran coffee should possess moderate body to full body, which provides the feeling of fullness in the mouth.


-------------------------------------

Coffee Cupping Traits

*  Fragrance - the smell of the beans after grinding

*  Aroma - the smell after brewing (breaking the crust)

*  Taste - the flavors of the coffee while tasting

*  Nose - the vapors released by the coffee in the mouth

*  Aftertaste - the flavors that remain after swallowing

*  Body - the feel of the coffee in the mouth