
Strength

Our coffees are graded from 1-5 with 1 being very mild and 5 being very strong. As all Espresso coffees are by their very nature strong and dark roasted they are rated E which means Espresso strength or Espresso roast.
Acidity

Acidity is a term used to describe coffee similarly to how dryness is used to describe wine. It is not referring to a pH level, acidity is in fact favourable and gives coffee a slight point – you can sense it on the front of your tongue. It is often associated with tasting notes such as sweet, sharp, citrus or fruit.
Body

Body gives an indication of how well rounded a coffee is – the feel of the coffee on the tongue. Blends tend to have a lot of body as different flavour profiles are put together to bring about a variety of tastes that can be sensed all over the mouth. A coffee’s body can range from light to full or even syrupy and is also affected by region and brewing method.
Roast rating

The longer the beans are roasted for the darker they get and the more oils break to the surface developing different tastes. A lighter roast will typically be light bodied and higher in acidity, as it moves to medium it will develop sweetness and more body, and as it progressively gets darker spicy, dark chocolate notes will develop bringing more developed body and intensity.
Pack Sizes

All of our coffees are packed in convenient sized foils to ensure optimum freshness and convenience. As a guide here are some of the packet sizes that we offer and the equipment that they’re ideally suited to:
Packet size 	Type of coffee 	Type of equipment
1k 	Beans 	Grinder
225g 	Cafetiere Scoop Out 	Cafetiere
200g 	Filter 	Bulk Brew
150g 	Filter 	Bulk Brew
70g 	Filter Single Airpot 	Thermos Filter Airpot
55g 	Filter Single Jug 	Twin Hotplate Filter
40g 	Filter Single Jug 	Single Hotplate Filter
20g 	Cafetiere Single Portion 	4 Cup Cafetiere (or multiple)
15g 	Cafetiere Single Portion 	3 Cup Cafetiere (or multiple)
7g 	Espresso ground 	Espresso machine

    tweet, tweet, tweet
    Latest News
        25% off Milkshake Starter Pack & Mixer

        For February, March and April Would you like to start stocking Shmoo? Available to new customers, for a limited period, …More »
    Testimonials
        Eastfield Garden Centre Ltd

        “A big thank you for the training last Friday…I am truly grateful to you for the training and Amelia, who I may say is brilliant at her job.” Joan Stephenson, Eastfield Garden Centre Ltd
    Contact us
    Give us a
    call or drop
    us an email
    Click here
    for more details
    Sign up to our newsletter



Dry-Process: The dry-process (also known as the natural method) produces coffee that is heavy in body, sweet, smooth, and complex.  The dry-process is often used in countries where rainfall is scarce and long periods of sunshine are available to dry the coffee properly.  Most coffees from Indonesia, Ethiopia, Brazil, and Yemen are dry-processed.

Wet-Process: Wet-processing coffees is a relatively new method of removing the four layers surrounding the coffee bean.  This process results in a coffee that is cleaner, brighter, and fruitier.  Most countries with coffee valued for its perceived acidity, will process their coffee using the wet-process.

Pulped Natural: The pulped natural method consists of pulping a coffee, but emitting the fermentation stage to remove the silverskin.  This results in a beverage that has characteristics of both a dry- and wet-processed coffee.  It is often sweeter than wet-processed coffees, has some of the body of a dry-processed coffee, but also retains some of the acidity of a wet-processed coffee.  This type of processing can only occur in countries where the humidity is low and the coffee covered in the sweet mucilage can be dried rapidly without fermenting.  Brazil has made this method famous and produces some of the best pulped natural coffees in the world. All twenty winners of the Gourmet Cup competition in Brazil in 2000 processed their coffees using the pulped natural method.

Re-passed:  There is another type of coffee that has emerged on the market called re-passed or raisins.  These coffees are floaters and are usually discarded with the rest of the floaters.  However, they have a flavor profile that some of the world's best experts find to be much sweeter than traditional pulped coffees.  The cherries float because they have dried too long on the tree before being collected.  This, however, allows the bean to interact with the mucilage for a longer amount of time before the start of fermentation.  The beans are removed from the rest of the floaters using a barrel system developed by Eduardo Sampio in Brazil.  The coffees are then re-passed and pulped.  They can then be washed or used as pulped naturals.  The availability of the curiously sweet re-passed coffees is very limited since it is mainly experimental at this time.  Ask your Brazilian supplier if they separate out this type of coffee and what flavor characteristics this coffee possesses.  It may be another option for espresso blending and is likely to become the fourth category of coffee processing.

Comparison: The vast majority of coffee producers will claim the virtue of their processing method. In Guatemala, for example, dry processing is a bad word and rightly so. Due to their high humidity a dry processed coffee will almost definitely be fermented, which is why only their lowest grade coffees are dried without pulping. However, in Brazil, dry processing results in a sweet, complex, and heavy-bodied coffee that is almost essential in any good espresso blend. The only conclusion that one can make is that every region has its own proper processing technique and that the processing technique should help attain the flavor profile that is desired by the producer and consumer.

Other Flavor Contributors: The processing method used on a coffee is usually the single largest contributor to the flavor profile of a coffee. The differences between a washed and dry-processed Brazilian coffee from Sul de Minas will generally be more distinct than the differences between two wet-processed coffees from two different regions. However, the microclimate and soil are the next major contributors to the flavor profile of a coffee and assuming processing is done correctly, they become the most important contributors to flavor profile.

Related Articles

Coffee Cupping

Coffee Cupping Form

Tongue Maps for Coffee

Coffee Chemistry- Aroma

Coffee Chemistry- Bitterness

Coffee Chemistry- Acidity




